the Senate was called on to act react to the design
of things of a separate school and so on there was I
think a little reaction to the Senate among other
faculty members who would like a little more money
to what was going to the Bush School by the
legislature etc and not one can understand that I
can sense that in the Senate meeting
Are
there any reactions that you can share that you
heard about from President Bush and or other
members of the Bush family as this proposal
process is underway? No, I have no special hints.
He's commented occasionally. It appeared to be a
good proposal. And, of course, the famous story
about either Louis Halbooty, I guess, who sent him
the precinct by precinct election returns
around Rice and around Houston and around here. I
have a feeling that may have had as much to do with it
as anything else. except it was a solid concrete
proposal and there was no way he could go to Austin
and where the hell else in Texas if you and Houston
and Rice have got no land John Lindsay I asked John
Lindsay one time when did he become aware that A&M
was almost certainly the winner and he chuckled
and said well most clearly I thought that when the
head of the Rice proposal and the U of H proposal
each came together to talk to me about... And see if
we'd join. And see if we'd join in making it a
three-way deal. He said, I thought we must be in
pretty good shape at that point. In hindsight, can
you think of anything that A&M might have done even
better? They might have done better had they not
put it as part of liberal arts. Oh. The school. Was
there anything that came about as a result of that?
Yes. The dean of liberal arts and political
science. And the dean of liberal arts desperately
wanted to hold on to it. He has got us involved with
faculty from all over the university. As a result,
the faculty structure, the course structure, the
curriculum are absolute messes. Oh, okay. And we
can't disengage easily. But now that separation
of the Bush School As a unit reporting directly to
the provost, that has now been done. That has been
done as of last fall. And you think that's an
appropriate decision? Yes. Is that? No, I think
getting Herman out was a political act. I don't
think the Bush family had anything to do with it.
I'm trying to find out exactly how that
legislative money was appropriated with an
implication that if Herman stayed, they wouldn't
get it. I think I'm reminded of a story of President
Harding. He was visiting William Allen White on
his way to the West Coast. And he was pacing the
library in White's house, and suddenly Harding
blurts out, My friends, my goddamn friends. I can
take care of my enemies, but my goddamn friends.
And I think this was friends of Bush. And Harding
never said anymore and went on to Alaska and died.
And you're implying self-appointed friends
doing something. Doing what they thought would be
a favor.
Let's see. What have we left out?
Oh, I don't know. I had some notes from what I've
previously been involved in. Oh,
one thing I've been glad to see at A&M is in the last
few years they've done some indoctrination for
new department heads. And it strikes me some deans
ought to have done that. And you think that's a
good... It sure as hell is. Now, I was out of public
administration. There was no great mystery. I'd
been involved with the school, which was in effect
a small department, and all the decisions, et
cetera. But I think of sociology, my
sociology head, paralleling me, went over his
budget, 10,000, because he didn't really quite
understand what Though I haven't got the right
term earmarking, you know, you make a commitment
to spend, you don't have it. So he went over his
budget 10,000 because he didn't encumber.
What about an orientation session a day or so for
all new faculty to learn more about the
institution? Well, I used to do this and go over the
rules and regulations, for example, as to what you
could do and not do and what you jolly well better do
if you don't want to trouble with complaints, etc.
The year I had my ten new faculty, I came and said,
Sam, just before you come in, I'm going to take them
for a day. And we're going down. how you get started
here. And one could have done a couple more days. I
also had made it a practice to new faculty members
get somebody to escort them to the first hill
practice over in the field house. So things of that
sort. I came here as a self-appointed critic of A&M
because it was different than what my
undergraduate school, little liberal arts
school at Austin College and Rice. But I gradually
became persuaded that A&M is distinctive and that
each institution ought to be.
What are the keys to understanding A&M?
Well, oddly
enough, the core is at the base of a lot of it,
because the core has caused other people to
organize also. Mm-hm. And I
got this out of both sociology and the military
that
You become loyal to a large group because you have a
small group of friends. You don't get loyalty to
the large group in the abstract.
Now I haven't been able to do that. I think I sold the
general who was dean of students on fraternities
in part by making that kind of point to him, and I
think he understood it. because the army early in
world war ii tried to abolish individual patches
for individual units in a misguided notion that
they were going to all think about one army and some
few sociologists stouffer chicago and some
others made the point look this ain't how it's done
and they began to get from all over the military
about inability to have their own units which
isn't divisive except in a very limited way. And
the army and military went hog wild over patches
and distinctive items, names, et cetera, for
units and so on. So the fraternities and
sororities, the organizations, It's got an
undergraduate organization. I think the MSC
mechanism is very basic. People can find a place.
There are all kinds there. And that's where it
begins. Is A&M Spirit special? Yes. Now, Cornell
had a great deal of Spirit. And I would say
Dartmouth. also.
But I think spirit also tends to be evidenced in
proportion of people who make annual giving.
There's a study of fraternities. The fraternity
men,
who are thought to be, you know, a lot of friends who
think they're intellectual anti-college give
more to their institutions in proportion than any
other group. Are you aware there are now more
fraternity and sorority members at A&M than there
are members of the Corps? No, I wasn't. And there is
a higher percentage, per capita percentage,
undergraduate fraternity and sorority members
here than at the University of Texas at Austin. Oh,
no. I have been connected with our own chapter
here. I was the young gentleman who was viewed as
the founder of the first fraternity here was the
guy who slept with the student.
He and I became . And having been a National Officer
of the fraternity, I helped him get his, I forget
the name of his group, organized and with bylaws
and such things. And then I helped one of the
sororities. Likewise, Vi Burke was associated
with one of the sororities, and when they got their
charter, I gave the main talk at the banquet, I
think.
All right, I've got then two final questions.
Let's make believe that someone gives you a check
for a million dollars today. and there is only one
requirement on that check, that you pass the money
on to Texas A&M, but you choose the use that would be
made for that gift. If you were doing something
significant for Texas A&M, for what purpose would
you want that generosity used?
Oh, I don't know. I'm inclined to think
I would give it to the president and tell him to use
it wherever he thinks he needs it. That's very
thoughtful.
I would like to comment on two things I failed at.
that I thought were damn good ideas and still do.
Oh, do offer that. This is in the educational world
for,
well, there are two or three here. For some time, we
had special sections in 206 and 207 for foreign
students. I don't think they do anymore. I have no
evidence of that. I thought this served a very
useful purpose. And I, for example, had Kwong
Ro, I had Marina Weiss, who was, Marina Weiss was
interesting. She was, she neither looked it nor
her name, but she was Puerto Rican and fluent in
Spanish. As she told me, her custom was with an
American government class to go in and function
for a week in their perfect eastern English and
then the second week she would start a little bit of
Spanish and there would influence Spanish and
there would be red faces all over the room.
A woman in teaching us Mexicans and Puerto Ricans
but Marina was very good So there, but that, you've
got to have people to do it, but it was feasible.
Then I began, and this was very interesting to do,
and several people willing, Warren Dixon took the
lead in
what we called contract courses. A student could
contract to do an A, B, or C.
And this suited a lot of people. They didn't have,
they had to do just what necessary to get a C, etc.
And there was one lecture period a week for
handling the things that needed to be done. But the
reading was carefully chosen. And each week or
each two weeks, there was an exam. Now you could
come back and take the second thing. You could come
back and take that exam several more times till you
got it. But you could get your C, but you had to pass
it. And now it meant a lot of initial work for the
faculty. But those were very popular,
particularly engineers who were desperate to get
through. They knew exactly what they had to do. But
it was very funny. Lebo, who was head of
journalism, said, I'm not going to allow students
to sign up for this. What the hell do you think
you're doing? And a couple of my own faculty said,
are you trying to do away with professors? Because
this means a lot less lecturing. The faculty work
with the A students who really can do it. And
they're spending time. And you don't need half as
many faculty. But I finally, this, when I left.
Don't forget your lapel. We've got one more
question. I could not get these. And also, this, of
course, also involved program learning. which I
thought was eminently sensible for heaven knows
the state and local government, the
constitutional part, a lot of it is working. Could
never get them to really take hold. Last question.
What feelings do you hold in your heart for Texas
A&M today? Well, I've been delighted and enjoyed
what I've done and been here. We expect to remain
here. Dorothy's become accommodated to us. It
took a year or two. And
she'd been in high school, and I went to Harrison
Hearth and she, and said she could teach
composition, and A&M is expanding, you know, and
has got to do composition throughout its years.
And so they pick her up as a... a lecture, and she'd
been here 20 years. I said, if I were her, I'll sue.
But no, we've been delighted, and the place has
grown, and it's a totally different place from
what it was. I think, say, much of the 2020 is
feasible
if they'll unloose
some of the administrative system occasionally
and some money. That's great with that.